[Music]
so
this episode of topcast begins now with
this preamble
and it's a preamble to a rather
long-winded introduction
before we even get to some readings from
the beginning of infinity today's
episode
explains the concept of bad philosophy
and as we will come to see
bad philosophy is that set of ideas that
actively prevents the growth of
knowledge
it is all about trying to enforce ways
and means of shutting down the asking of
questions or deliberately putting
artificial obstacles in the way of
critically
and rationally evaluating claims now
as i was making my usual introduction to
this episode
which i will play for you shortly i
realized upon going back to listen to it
i was assuming a little too much when it
comes to
bad philosophy the bad turns that have
happened with respect to philosophy
especially over recent years i want to
flesh out those a little more here and
now with just a little summary about
these bad
terms and where to go to find out more
some additional reading if you like now
the first of these
bad terms that i mentioned is what's
known as the sokul hoax
the circle hoax or the circle affair was
a turning point of sorts in the recent
history of philosophy
alan circle after whom the cyclohex is
named
is a physicist and a mathematician who
was concerned with the standards of
scholarship in some areas of philosophy
he was specifically concerned they were
subpar to put it
euphemistically at the other extreme you
might describe
what was going on in philosophy and what
he was worried about as a kind of
academic fraud
and the fact that this academic fraud
has become the norm
in some areas of philosophy and it has a
lot of influence
now in short these areas of philosophy
that people are concerned about are
sometimes known as
postmodern philosophy there's a lot of
other names for them but that's an
umbrella term
and the key feature for outsiders to
philosophy to notice about
postmodern philosophy is that it has a
somewhat
impenetrable language now of course this
is true of many academic disciplines
it's true of certain aspects of physics
any area of expertise in science
parts of medicine so you know
when you get to the upper levels of
expertise in any area you're going to
find there is a kind of jargon
but there's a difference between
honestly trying to explain things
clearly using this specialist language
of a particular subject
and dishonestly representing what's
going on
in a subject area using the language of
some other subject area
if that sounds confusing well we need to
see an example
in action what sokol was concerned about
and what many of us are concerned about
is the rather
liberal use of terminology taken from
the hard sciences and from mathematics
and then repurposed for use in a
completely different area
in a rather dishonest way to obscure
meaning
rather to than to clarify things so for
example here's
uh here's something that is taken
seriously by
some postmodernists this example is by
jacques lacan it's been published it's
an example of postmodern philosophy
let's read it let's attempt to read it
thus by calculating
that signification according to the
algebraic method used here namely
s signifier over s signified equals
s the statement with s is equal to minus
one produces
s is equal to the square root of minus
one okay so this is what
the postmodernist philosopher jacques
lacan wrote
who knows what it means yes it's taken
out of context
but even out of its context we should be
able to
if we are familiar with mathematics
attempt to understand
at least some part of it and there's
nothing there
that has anything to do with mathematics
despite the fact it's couched in terms
of
mathematical formalism it's
misrepresenting mathematics
but perhaps i'm being unfair perhaps
it's unfair just to pull out
that weird sounding thing and
claim that all post-modernism is
therefore bunk well let's have a look at
something else
here's something written by the french
post modernist bourdain
and he wrote perhaps history itself has
to be regarded as a chaotic formation in
which acceleration puts an end to
linearity and the turbulence created by
acceleration
deflects history definitively from its
end just as such turbulence
distances effects from their causes end
quote now the point about that passage
is yes it's got impenetrable texts
um and in attempting to extract any
useful information from it is almost
impossible it's clouded in jargon
but that's not the only problem it has
taken
terms from physics chaotic formation
acceleration and from mathematics
linearity
and from physics again turbulence and
it's completely bastardized their use
it's a word soup pretending to be deep
now i'm not going to provide lots of
examples of this anyone who's interested
can
merely go and look up post-modernism and
examples of post-modernist writing
from some of the greats some other names
might be jacques derrida
michelle foucault these are some famous
names in post-modernism
and one only needs to take a short look
at anything that these guys produce
to notice that it really there's not
much there
there's the pretense of intellectual
endeavor
there's the pretense of producing
knowledge but it's more akin to
poetry than actual philosophy now many
people before sokol had of course
noticed this many had wondered how it is
that such things got published in
official journals
and they were published in official
academic journals what sokol did that
was special and different and was the
first but it certainly wasn't going to
be the last
was the calling out of the emperor as
having no clothes
by creating a text himself so he went to
the trouble of writing a post-modernist
text he was a mathematician
a physicist he understood the science
and he decided to deliberately parody
the style of writing that went that went
on in some of these journals
and so the result of his hoax of his
parody
was to produce this paper which is
called transgressing the boundaries
towards a transformative hermeneutics of
quantum gravity
now that paper nonsense as it was
parity as it was was not detected as
nonsense or parity
by the reviewers and it was submitted to
a journal called social texts accepted
for publication
and ultimately published so it was taken
seriously
by some post-modern philosophers even
though it was deliberately written as a
parody
and even to this day it is still
defended by some as
actually being authentic rather than the
parody that it is
now arguments continue to be made today
that the circle hoax did not fully
demonstrate the poverty of postmodern
philosophy
some say it didn't even demonstrate the
poverty of postmodern philosophy
publishing or reviewing and and people
are committed now to still
take post-modernism seriously in fact
more so than at the time of the cycle
hoax the circle hoax did not accomplish
what many of us hoped it would things
have gotten worse
but if you're watching this or listening
to this you might very well be thinking
who cares
who cares if these people in their ivory
towers want
to talk nonsense what is the worry aside
from the fact that
taxpayer money and funding goes to these
universities and these people remain
employed not by contributing things
to society or contributing actual
knowledge but by being engaged in a kind
of racket
and worse than a racket and we'll come
to that what's the worry
like after all some people are of course
interested
and have turned for example the study of
harry potter into a serious academic
endeavor
there might be some merit to that but
there is something far more sinister at
work with post-modernism
post-modern writing and its explicit
deliberate attack on clarity
comes from a deeper dogma about the
possibility of even speaking clearly
or the purpose of speaking clearly and
the reason for this is that
is that the doctrine of post-modernism
is about denying the fact that there
is anything to speak clearly about there
is no objective truth
on the theories and doctrines of
post-modernism
and will come to some consequences about
that now
cycle really did disrobe post-modernism
back in the 90s in the mid-90s
and personally that was a key time for
me because i was just entering
university and i was taking on physics
and philosophy so i was well aware of
the debate
even back then and i remember feeling
relief that there was a hero among
the scientists who were standing up to
this nonsense in academia and philosophy
in particular
and i felt some hope at that time just
like
the emperor's new clothes everyone that
everyone would then admit
that the emperor had been called out and
there was this poverty of content in
post-modernism
and post-modern type thinking and that
the philosophy itself was bad
but i was wrong in my hopes at least at
that stage and up until now because ever
since
my hopes have been dashed things haven't
gotten better not in the universities
they've gotten worse far worse they've
gotten worse in the media
they've gotten worse in education
they've gotten worse in politics and the
rate
at which bad ideas are being produced in
academia
are accelerating the rate at which bad
ideas are being produced and promoted
throughout social media traditional
media
schools the rate of that production of
bad ideas
is accelerating and i mean bad ideas not
merely false ideas
bad ideas i mean ideas that are calling
into question
the legitimacy of actual knowledge of
science of the enlightenment of reason
itself
and the legitimacy of pursuing those
things
and make no mistake in many places it's
dire
now happily almost in lock step with the
rate at which these bad ideas have
increased
in terms of their apparent popularity
and the rate at which they are being
promoted to all spheres of society
across many of our institutions there
has equally
arisen a resistance
a coalition of people coming up and
standing together against what is
swiftly becoming
what could possibly only be described as
a new religion now one of the
best most articulate thinkers and there
are many
to choose from here but one of the best
and most articulate
amongst these thinkers and amongst these
public intellectuals is
brett weinstein now i've personally
criticized brett on some technical
philosophical
matters and matters of physics in just i
think the last episode of topcast or
the episode before that but i can only
do that i can only engage in that
criticism
of brett weinstein because i do spend a
lot of time listening to him
because he's a worthwhile voice to
listen to with brett it's important to
pay
careful attention to how well he
articulates some of these problems
what he says on many of these matters to
do with bad philosophy
bad certain types of bad science is
brilliant because he himself is a
brilliant thinker
he's very courageous and i've found him
prescient
on some of these matters i'm going to
play a clip for you
shortly of brett being so prescient but
just before we get to that
i'm just going to mention uh three of
his fellow travelers with respect to all
of this stuff
fellow travelers in the battle against
the new
post-modernism now traditional
post-modernism this denial of
um truth this denial of the possibility
of objective knowledge
denial even of reality let alone merely
the denial of objective morality
that's traditional post-modernism and
that those ideas
are still the underlying doctrine for
everything that has happened since in
the tradition of post-modernism
which has begun to push the idea that
for example science has no special place
in understanding the physical world it
pushes the idea that
science is to some extent corrupt and
cannot possibly be objective
and as it is certainly the opinion of
many of these post-modernists
that science is far more about power
and social relationships than it is
about finding the truth about the
physical world
in other words people who speak like
this think that
what is deemed scientific knowledge is
deemed scientific knowledge
only because certain people of with
power
have historically been able to claim
that this is scientific knowledge that
it doesn't have anything to do about
encounters with objective reality that
instead it's
powerful white men or something like
that arguing amongst themselves and
arriving at a consensus and that this is
what produces scientific knowledge
and it's because certain people that
have traditionally had power have
historically had power
have simply decided arbitrarily that
this is what is
the best theory in science the best
explanations in science
now today in the 2010s and now into the
early 2020s
the new breed of post-modernism
philosophy comes to us in
all sorts of guises there's cultural
studies certain
breeds of anthropology gender studies
some forms of literary and media studies
some of the humanities and some of the
social sciences have been infected by
this stuff which has broadly been
which has broadly been described by some
of these academics who
push back against it grievance studies
what post-modernism today has evolved
into in some places
is a sole focus upon power relationships
between people
according to this mode of thinking those
groups of people who have historically
held
power have done so for illegitimate
reasons and thus any knowledge
associated with them
for example scientific knowledge must be
regarded as dubious because it was
produced by
the so-called oppressor class the
consequence is today that
people who appear to have been descended
from those groups
who had power in the past so people in
the past who had power
individuals today that are related to
those people in some way
no matter how distantly related must be
judged as in some way
culpable for and benefiting from those
illegitimate structures and that would
include the knowledge that they produce
or their claim to be producing objective
knowledge
now many others have spoken far more
eloquently about all this
but the point before us now is about the
philosophy on which
all of this stuff rests so once more
despite the so-called hoax we have yet
again
academic journals publishing papers from
university employed
intellectuals pushing dubious ideas
poorly phrased and even more poorly
researched and so because the fight
isn't over
just like allen cycle some people have
decided to once again reveal
the poverty of ideas by committing a
hoax
and showing the emperor's new clothes
are in fact non-existent
and in the most recent case which is
worth researching
looking up and looking at the history of
it happened um
throughout 2019 and it's known as the
so-called squared
hoax or just circle squared
or the grievance study issue and this
circle squared event was conducted by
peter berkosian who was a philosopher
helen pluckrose who is a writer
and james lindsay who's a mathematician
and they submitted
absolutely ridiculous papers to a number
of
journals to a number of gender studies
journals and
and cultural studies journals and
various other journals that they've
described as grievance studies
now i say that these were absolutely
ridiculous because
for a typical person not indoctrinated
with the
grievance study nomenclature and the
grievance study way
of speaking they weren't merely
ridiculous they were hilarious
and so i won't go through the details
but again worth looking up
despite the fact they are ridiculous and
hilarious they were taken totally
seriously
and published as serious pieces
and these journals that publish them are
themselves
in a broader sense driving a philosophy
which itself
drives political movements political
movements of grievance
and rather than summarize the papers
i'll just point you to
google and just go to google and google
social squared or the grievance studies
affair
again why be interested in this why be
animated by any of this
philosophers really do tend to have the
ear of people
in academia in the universities
and moreover those same intellectuals
have the ear of people who write school
curricula
so school syllabuses where
students who go off to primary school
and secondary school
are taught things that are written by
people
in committees i know this i've been on
some of these committees
and these committees consult very
heavily with university academics
and in particular these kind of
philosophers
these kind of philosophers are desperate
to have
input into such school curricula because
if you can get them young
we know that's a good way to
change society from the ground up
moreover
this material not only does it get into
school curricula it gets into
traditional media because the media can
at times
journalists can at times be rather
uncritical if someone is employed at a
university and they've got a phd
in the title of professor and if they're
interviewed about
important issues like racism or
discrimination or the law
or science the media takes them
seriously
they want to have expert opinion after
all
and if the media takes them seriously so
too will politicians eventually
and it becomes part of the moral
zeitgeist the background culture
the deference to expertise in the
community has
two sides to it on the one hand in times
of crisis
it can cause people to swiftly turn to
the people who've got genuine knowledge
and ability
capability to solve
pressing problems that society has
and that's important that's important to
have uh
deference probably isn't the best word
but a healthy respect
for expertise but on the other hand
this difference can turn from being mere
respect
into a granting of authority to experts
over matters they don't really have much
business in
or where the expert's expertise
is merely illusory they're not really
experts because there's no actual
subject matter there over which they can
be experts
and this is what post-modernism often is
and what is what it is
criticized as i i subject with very
little content
but of course it should be media or the
media's
and indeed everyone's responsibility to
critically assess which experts are
genuinely
and honestly trying to solve problems
and which on the other hand are
attempting to make a grab for
power and authority and presently as i
write this in august 2020 there are
still riots going on in some places
where there have not been riots for many
years certainly not this intensity
and there are calls for revolution and
changing of
entire systems of governance and yes
this has happened before
there is to some extent a tradition of
calling for revolutions
but this latest one has a somewhat
different
flavor even if it might have happened
before it's had a different flavor to
anything that's happened in my life
certainly
and the different flavor is in saying
that
the present traditions cultures
and institutions that exist today
in what in the beginning of infinity
sense we might describe as a
tradition of criticism and the
enlightenment
is itself being described as a
source of great evil and that it itself
needs to be uprooted
and replaced by something else which is
never properly specified
and so this is a worry these calls for
revolution
don't come from nowhere they don't exist
in a vacuum
there are bad ideas at the heart of all
this the ideas come from the university
and they spill out from the university
into wider society so before i get to
the actual introduction
this is this is the preamble remember
the preamble to the introduction and
then we'll get to the readings
um before i get to the introduction of
today's episode i just want to play a
short clip of the brilliant brett
weinstein himself speaking in early
2019. so early 2019 this is
cast your mind back before corona
before some of the worst riots that were
happening
across the united states across europe
that made it to certain parts of
australia
before all the protests the marches the
tearing down of monuments the defacing
of things
before all of that brett weinstein
himself
found himself in a very difficult
situation where at his place of
employment where he was working as a
professor of biology
evergreen university he was uh
protested by a mob can only be described
as that
protest might be euphemistic as well
and eventually he was driven out forced
to resign
and so that was early 2019 and at that
time
he said this i have to say i keep being
invited to talk about free speech on
college campuses and every time i'm
invited i make the same point which is
this isn't about free speech and this is
only
tangentially about college campuses this
is about a breakdown
in the basic logic of civilization and
it's spreading
and college campuses may be the first
dramatic
battle but of course this is going to
find its way
into the courts it's already found its
way into the tech sector
it's going to find its way to the
highest levels of governance if we're
not careful and
it actually does jeopardize the ability
of civilization to continue to function
how has it gotten to this point
uh in part it has gotten to this point
because we let it fester
these ideas were wrong when they first
took hold
in the academy and instead of shutting
them down
we created phony fields that act as a
kind of
analytical affirmative action where
ideas that do not
deserve to survive are given sustenance
these ideas are so toxic and so
ill-conceived that to the extent that
they are allowed to hold sway
as if one truth is equal to
every other truth right my truth is as
good as your truth
to the extent that that idea is allowed
to pervade
other institutions on which civilization
depends
civilization will come apart so we have
to fight this
and don't get the sense that it is just
about
college campuses or kids overreacting
because
that ain't what this is this is far more
important than that
[Music]
that's quite a set of observations and
and quite a warning
um about how university campuses are
just the first place
where this might have started dramatic
as it is in the universities
and what's happened it spilled out onto
the streets in many places
uh it's resulted in people seriously
calling for
what happened at evergreen university
was that the students called for
essentially the upending of the way in
which the university
structure was had been built and
even though evergreen university was a
very very liberal
arts college and so these people were
politically already from
one side of politics it's been taken
even further
such that someone who is extremely
liberal like brett weinstein
was driven out now it's been spilling
out of universities for a long time i
know something about
schools it's in schools already it's
been in school since the 90s
and so what we tend to get less of
is not a celebration of all that is
great and all that is good
and ways in which we can preserve
traditions that work and traditions of
criticism that work
instead we talk about the ways in which
structures can be destroyed or brought
down
or the ways in which we can transgress
boundaries for example
transgressing boundaries is very much a
theme that was there when i was at
school
uh sort of mid early 90s kind of thing
and it's it's still kind of there now
it's an explicit theme that runs
throughout english syllabi for example
post-modernism drives large parts of the
school curriculum
and this should be a concern for
whatever other concerns one has about
schooling this should be a concern to
people
it is only a small group of academics
after all that are generating these bad
ideas in
the universities these bad philosophies
are not being produced typically
in the school of physics or chemistry or
medicine
or engineering or history sometimes
history
they're mainly being produced in schools
of sociology anthropology and to
philosophy
and they have great influence and
they're gaining ever more
actual authority as some of these people
who produce them rise through the ranks
of academia and
either become or influence
administrators and once these tenants
become customer practice and received
wisdom at universities
they then become a background to culture
and as i say they infiltrate the media
and politics and the bureaucracy in
government
and so this is why this chapter that
we're about to read about bad philosophy
is so important right now and i fear
it's going to become only
more and more important as time goes on
until
until such a day and if such a day but
we hope until
bad philosophy is no longer on the
ascendancy and until bad philosophy is
no longer on the ascendancy
intellectual types have to continue to
call it out
because it undergirds so much that is
bad
in politics or bad in broader education
it actively prevents knowledge objective
knowledge from being produced not least
because there's a chilling effect
on the very act of criticism or even of
simply attempting to create knowledge
that just might be a counter to the
dominant political narrative that exists
it has a chilling effect on the freedom
of speech
let's put that plainly these
philosophies
have at their heart certain modes of
thinking
which prevent people from criticizing
them
now to some this might seem like
hyperbole and to me it can seem that way
as well i encounter
none of what brett said earlier
the the real concerns about this and the
what
what happened to brett for example it's
never happened to me
okay um what happened to him isn't part
of my day-to-day
i only witnessed these kind of weird
events riots
defacing of of monuments
people shouting at each other without
listening to each other
acts of violence protesting
i watch this from afar okay it's not
something that affects me each and every
day
but brett does brett weinstein does
speak about the breakdown
of the logic of civilization and in some
places we can see that
a riot is just that and the important
thing is
we have less reason to write than ever
before
especially in the west in developed
countries life
is better than it ever has been
for almost everyone and is getting
better
continually but the writing has
increased
public protests have increased people
are speaking as if
things are getting worse all the while
they're actually getting better
putting aside parochial concerns that
are just happening right now about
viruses and lockdowns
so this is the breakdown of logic things
are getting better
people are saying they are worse things
continue to get better
people are writing because they say
nothing has changed
now these ideas these bad philosophies
driving this intense
feeling that things are really terrible
and that things are
getting worse or not changing have
tested themselves already
in the laboratory of the university and
they were not
sufficiently criticized while still in
the university
and so because they've been allowed to
thrive and been cultured
and have now sprung out of the
university as
anti-rational memes do as mined viruses
so to speak
they have entered schools to some extent
and to an increasing extent and to the
media to another extent
and they're proliferating across social
media and informing the world
view of many many people including
political leaders and
others who work in government and hold
positions of power so this is the
context
and i might say urgent context in which
we encounter this chapter from the
beginning of infinity
as i say the riots some of the civil
unrest in recent months
has not occurred in a vacuum there is a
philosophy at the heart of this
even if it does not seem to be a
struggle between opposing philosophies
but rather something more upstream so to
speak like mere political differences
so yeah it's not mere political
differences
it's not merely left versus right it's
not merely
authoritarians versus libertarians
it's also about the philosophy that
holds
whether or not there's a possibility of
uncovering
objective knowledge and whether or not
objective knowledge and coming to
uncover it coming to discover objective
knowledge to create objective knowledge
whether or not that can help resolve
differences and if we have differences
how we go about resolving those
differences whether we should talk those
differences through
so we need to take a step back back
before the present moment
and all the strife and before even the
last circle hoax
and the next chapter is going to allow
us to do this so
finally let's actually get into it well
my my
other introduction to it and for that
i'm going to change of english hello
and welcome to episode 28 this is
chapter 12
a physicist history of bad philosophy
with some remarks on bad science
now i try not to have favorite chapters
but if someone was to ask me
if i was to only read one chapter out of
all of the beginning of infinity
it would probably be this one and for me
it's certainly a personal one and i'll
probably go through
through a few anecdotes as we go through
this chapter it's a personal one for me
because it brings together
physics and philosophy in a way that i
encountered
both subjects it tries to explain why it
is that
physics can be so confusing sometimes
for undergraduates who take on a degree
in physics
and why philosophy can sometimes be so
disappointing at university
for an undergraduate who takes on
philosophy at university and i did both
of these things and so it resonated with
me
i thought as i was reading through it i
just found myself nodding the entire
time going yes that was precisely my
experience
this is what i understand philosophy as
presented at the university
to be about so i studied physics at
university and there were certain
disappointments about studying physics
at university not least of which was the
quantum mechanics material
which we've been through previously and
i was disappointed in the way it was
presented at university because it was
presented in this obscure way
the mystery was really amped up it was
presented as if well you don't need to
fully understand this
it was very much instrumentalist in that
way instead it was all about
can you solve these numerical problems
can you work through these
uh tutorial sets and that was the
measure by which you were successful at
university and doing physics
was whether or not you could uh
basically do maths tests
repeatedly okay there was less in terms
of
trying to explain what was actually
going on with many of the experiments
and philosophy was disappointing for a
whole different set of reasons obviously
there's no
numerical problems that need to be
solved there however there's a new kind
of vocabulary that needs to be used
and what i found was that as i went
through undergraduate philosophy
it became increasingly opaque to
analysis
it was just more and more difficult to
understand what
in fact was being said and it felt as
though
the lecturers or the books that we were
or the readings we were asked to
undertake were trying to obscure the
point and when the point
was illuminated it was found to be so
trite
or trivial and obvious that one was left
feeling as though
there was little substance to philosophy
and that the rumors were true
and when i say rumors i mean i heard
from many people
that philosophy is a fairly worthless
discipline at university
and to some extent the rumors were
indeed true
some watching this now might still
wonder what the importance of philosophy
is
philosophy as an academic discipline
ghana's possibly the least respect of
any subject
that can be taken university although
these days
we do hear people sort of
tongue-in-cheek talking about certain
kinds of dance
theory that one might take on at
university and that these kind of
degree programs are even more useless
we have to understand there are two ways
in which to refer to philosophy
there's philosophy the academic
discipline the way in which it is
presented at university
and there is philosophy as it's actually
done by
good philosophers good philosophers
include poppa and i should say here
right at the outset that i read very
little poppa at university
despite the fact i undertook a degree
which was subtitled
philosophy of science bachelor of
science philosophy of science and in my
philosophy of science degree
i read very little pop-up it wasn't
until later
that in encountering david deutsch's
work that i realized there was this guy
called karl popper and he explained
philosophy of science and it was then
that i
took up the reading of karl popper
outside of my university course
so although i am in some sense
credentialed in the philosophy of
science
none of the knowledge that i or very
little of the knowledge that i gained at
university
actually makes me feel equipped to talk
about the philosophy of science
instead what makes me feel equipped to
talk about the philosophy of science
when i do
is the reading that i did beyond the
university specifically
the reading i did of karl popper's work
so the
the negative experience that i had with
philosophy at university or largely had
i should say there were bright points i
did read a lot of good
philosophers and philosophies and i
found it
interesting as an intellectual exercise
or an intellectual puzzle so to speak it
was kind of fun
that kind of philosophy is like doing a
crossword puzzle it's just
fun to do for some people however there
was very little of
practical use in many of the
philosophers that i
read good as those philosophers were
brilliant as those philosophers were
a few of them were able to explain for
example
how it is that science worked which is
what i was really interested in or what
the difference between
let's say science and mathematics
happened to be or
indeed what the purpose of philosophy
was in the first place all of these
things are practical problems that for
someone interested in
science mathematics philosophy would be
interested in finding out concrete
answers too
instead some philosophers were kind of
daydreamers
on the one hand or well let's just put
it plainly academic frauds on the other
they were pretending to solve problems
that were either not problems in the
first place
or hiding the fact that they were
solving the problem burying the problem
behind a veneer of complicated language
and so because there is this way of
presenting philosophy at universities
where we have certain philosophers who
build up grand
philosophical structures on the one hand
solving esoteric type problems in
philosophy
or on the other these linguistic
philosophers that we're going to come to
who are obscuring
the the real richness of the problems in
philosophy behind
all of this verbiage and new lexicon
and weird words that they invent and
just generally not speaking clearly
this is what a whole lot of philosophers
have done traditionally
and continue to do that because of these
two issues
philosophers difficult to understand on
the one hand and not really solving any
problems
and philosophers hiding the ball when it
comes to
their use of language and trying to hide
the actual problems that are
important to solve in philosophy because
we have
this issue of academic in academic
philosophy
quite rightly a bunch of people
especially scientific types dismiss
philosophy altogether
because they look at what philosophy is
as an academic discipline in the in many
of the universities
probably not all but certainly in the
universities that i went through
and one doesn't need to try hard with
google to find out that what
subjects are offered to undergraduates
especially at university today
don't differ much from the kind of
academic subjects that were offered in
philosophy 20 years ago
in some senses they've even gone
downhill it's quite right that there are
certain scientific types who say
they've got no time for philosophy
because they're interested in reality so
they say in the nuts and bolts of how
things work
prominent public intellectuals like neil
degrasse tyson
richard dawkins they've made disparaging
remarks over the years about philosophy
and they can't really be blamed for this
to a large extent
because if their experience of academic
philosophy is in speaking to
certain academic philosophers or even
perhaps students undertaking philosophy
at university
then they'll be left with the impression
that it's an opaque
pointless exercise in gazing at one's
navel
as the cliche goes but it's important to
note that this idea that philosophy
cannot be used to solve practical
problems or that has no practical use
that if you're un
if you want to understand reality that
science is the only real game in town
it's important to understand that that
position
is a philosophy that these people who
espouse
those kind of sentiments that disparage
philosophy as a discipline in its
entirety not just the academic thing
as it's taught at university but
philosophy
subject so to speak that they have a
philosophy in mind they have a
philosophy of reality
they have a certain materialism one
might imagine
about how reality is organized that if
you want to understand the nuts and
bolts of
reality that understanding science
is the only way to go about that of
course this closes them off
to a whole bunch of other things things
that are not let's say
part of the physical universe but might
be part of
abstract reality and we've talked about
the reality of abstractions here in this
series and david's talked about it in
the beginning of infinity so we know
that abstract entities exists
and that they have real effects in the
world and there are certain kinds of
abstract reality
abstract entities that only a
philosophical understanding
can help us to appreciate how those
things work
so the idea that science is the only
way in which we can understand reality
as a whole
is itself a philosophy and it's a claim
about science without being a part of
science so automatically anyone who
makes
such a claim that philosophy is useless
or that philosophy isn't really needed
that science can do everything has made
a philosophical claim because it's not a
claim from within science
and today we've got a a new kind of
philosopher and you kind of
folk philosopher we we might say one who
claims
that they never do philosophy or don't
do philosophy or pretend that they're
not
interested in philosophy because they've
stepped beyond it they've evolved
intellectually beyond what philosophy
can possibly offer
to become meta in some way they're meta
philosophers they're beyond philosophy
um there's a long tradition of this kind
of thing as well
the kind of thinker that asserts that
the language and the words
are barely sufficient to capture the
complexity of their thoughts
now there's certainly a truth to this in
some ways there's
i speak a lot about inexplicit knowledge
and david
explains what inexplicit knowledge is in
the beginning of infinity
and so it is absolutely true that
language cannot capture
everything about reality to the level of
clarity that we might
wish but some people elevate that notion
that
very real problem to a new philosophy
and give themselves an excuse i would
argue
in not speaking clearly or not striving
for clarity
and that their use of obscure language
or their use of
neologisms simply making up new words is
explained by the fact
that language is simply unable to do the
job of conveying
their deepest most interesting thoughts
to the world
and so therefore they have to explain
using
flowery language to the rest of us and
that if you don't understand what the
new flowery language really means then
it's a deficiency on your part not their
part
they're doing their best with the crude
tools of language they have
and so we see this we've seen this with
theologians
traditionally you ask a theologian a
religious explanation and you'll
typically get something that is
quite complicated or mystical difficult
to understand
and if you ask what that means you'll
get an even more
obscure mystical explanation
and so the the inexplicable is supposed
to explain the
inexplicable so when it comes to this
idea that
language struggles to explain the most
complicated
concepts and ideas that we have there's
a truth there but there's a difference
between
honestly trying to communicate clearly
and trying to get a complicated idea
uh trying to get that into the minds of
other people
by using the simplest language that one
can conjure
in the moment and
the antithesis of that of having perhaps
not a complicated idea but a very simple
idea
and then dressing that in
very complicated sounding language so
that it
seems as though one has a deeper or more
insightful point than one really does
and i think there are dishonest actors
in philosophy
there's not many of them but they're out
there and
when it comes to things like
post-modernism it's very difficult to
tell
at times whether the person that you're
speaking with or communicating with who
speaks in post-modernist type language
or relativist like language
whether they are honestly
deluded in some way and think that there
is something there that they're trying
to explain
whether they've been perhaps even
inculcated
or brainwashed to some extent
with these weird ideas in this weird
language
that's a possibility that they're
honestly trying to convey
the contents of their mind using
complicated sounded language that none
of us can
quite get a handle on or on the other
hand they're simply pretending
because there are cranks out there crank
being a technical term of someone
pretending to have knowledge that they
don't actually have
or pretending to have competence that
they don't actually have
for a whole bunch of reasons and there
could be a whole bunch of psychological
reasons for that
now in academia is this custom
practice no the the overwhelming
majority of people in
intellectual life in academia and
university academia are
honestly striving to create new
knowledge
to pass on the knowledge that
civilization has learned
and to do that with the utmost clarity
but not everyone and in philosophy this
is a particular
particular challenge because some of the
ideas are extremely
complicated and subtle and so it is
difficult to get that idea across
no matter the the the clarity of the
language one tries to use
but there is another kind of philosopher
to my mind
who isn't striving always for clarity
now this dishonest type of philosopher
has been getting more and more attention
lately
has been a revival to some extent of the
idea of the so-called hoax now for
anyone who doesn't know i'm just
explaining this off the top of my head
um there was there there is a physicist
his name is alan sokol
and he noticed that there were
parts of philosophy where the language
being used was
simply ridiculous that they would borrow
terms from
science or mathematics and use them in
philosophical papers
in completely ridiculous ways in
completely
logical irrational unreasonable ways to
construct
text that made no sense at all but these
texts
would go on to be published in journals
and this would preserve
the careers of these philosophers
because there is that old adage
publish or perish basically meaning if
you're an academic and you
aren't consistently publishing work then
you might not have your job for very
long because one of your tasks as an
academic at a university
is to increase the prestige of the
university by continually appearing in
journals by getting published
professionally now there could be a
racket here created
in certain areas where the
journal editors where the journal
editors and the
people who submit papers to the journals
just have a
non-verbal understanding if one might
put it that way
they might have an unspoken
understanding that
no matter what kind of rubbish is
submitted to the journal it will get
published anyway
because we're all in this together of
pretending that there's something here
when there's nothing there it's very
much an emperor the emperor's new
clothes kind of idea
now this physicist alan circle wasn't
the first to notice that it seemed as
though
that it seemed as though there was this
kind of dishonesty going on
in areas of philosophy these areas of
philosophy by the way sometimes go under
the name
of post-modernism or relativism
and i should say that when i was in when
i was at university and studying
philosophy there was a
there was a pretty sharp divide
between what were known as the
analytic philosophers who were honestly
striving to
create new knowledge and philosophy and
solve problems
they were the people they were the
people working on philosophical logic
they were the people working on the
philosophy of biology for example
people working on ethics people just
trying to understand what it was that
descartes was really trying to say
in his meditations for example and then
there were the other kinds of
philosophers who weren't doing that
who i attended a couple of lectures here
and there
where you one could tell that there
wasn't any real substance there
that it was all about trying to use
fancy sounding language it was more an
exercise in
kind of weird abstract poetry to some
extent although they would never admit
that they would never say that either
and one one is left feeling as though
one lacks a certain level of
intelligence if they don't understand
that these papers that are being written
anyway whatever the case
alan sokol the physicist decided he
would write a paper
that was complete and utter nonsense
from a physics perspective but using
lots of physics terms
and he tried to see whether he could get
this nonsense published in an actual
journal
and he succeeded and that has ever since
been known as the so-called hoax
and he wrote a book about it and since
then there have been
other examples of this especially in
recent years of
academics proper academics
writing hoax fictional
nonsense papers and submitting them to
certain journals to see if they'll get
through what's called the refereeing
process now one presumes in
physics chemistry the hard sciences that
medicine
the various other academic disciplines
that this tends not to happen
it's not impossible okay area is the
normal state of things
it's not impossible for a fraud to
happen in science
you know scientific fraud does happen
but it's the exception not the rule
and one hasn't seen so far as i know
anyone in the humanities
writing a nonsense paper in physics and
having it published by
a good journal in physics that simply
tends not to happen that doesn't happen
but more than once hard scientists
or serious people in the humanities have
written nonsense papers
submitted them to these journals these
social science journals and had them
published
that's a real problem so alan sokol
wrote a book about
his attempt at doing this this hoax and
i strongly recommend the book to you but
if you're not going to read the whole
book
reading richard dawkins review
of the book online is just fantastic i
mean
when when richard dawkins wants to make
a withering critique of someone he
certainly can and i just want to read
the first paragraph of
professor dawkins review of alan
circle's book
about fraud in the humanities
specifically fraud
in philosophy in areas of philosophy and
what dawkins wrote
was this suppose you are an intellectual
imposter with nothing to say
but with strong ambitions to succeed in
academic life
collect a courtier of reverent disciples
and have students around the world
anoint your pages with respectful yellow
highlighter
what kind of literary style would you
cultivate
not a lucid one surely for clarity would
expose your lack of content
end quote now i just i love that quote
i fell in love with it soon after it was
published in 1998
because i was like i say right in the
middle of a degree in this stuff
and struggling to sift the sense from
the nonsense coming from my own
lecturers at university
now you tend to get clarity in the
astrophysics lectures and the classical
physics lectures and the electrodynamics
lectures and the the
relativity lectures uh even if sometimes
what would happen in the quantum physics
lectures was a certain amount of
nonsense
in the school of philosophy you did get
this sense that
there was a sharp divide as i say
between those ones who are trying to
make sense and those who
are summed up by that
that quote that i just read from from
professor dawkins
you know not speaking lucidly because
not speaking
because in speaking lucidly if you tried
to speak clearly
that would expose a lack of content and
this has been a great rule of thumb for
me in my own mind
when i hear someone and they say or
write something and at first glance i
don't understand it
i've got two ways to go either either
the content of the idea really is so
subtle and complicated
that persevering will reveal the
gem of truth or the kernel of truth in
the middle of that
or they're trying to hide a lack of
content and it's
it tends to be easy to find
if it's one or the other by simply
looking at what else has been written
by this person so by way of example when
it comes to making sense
or not of post-modernism let's just look
at
jacques derrida there he is
let me read a short passage from derrida
and
see what we can understand of his work
derrida was the founder of the
post-modern philosophy called
deconstructionism and this philosophy is
close to my heart because it's
ubiquitous in schools now
in high schools the deconstruction of
texts
and artworks and of anything else really
is the flavor of the month and has been
for a long time
so rather than constructing or focusing
on the constructing and creating
of new artwork new text it's more about
dismantling and pulling apart
this philosophy holds that symbols
language for example or whatever else
one might choose to use
is insufficient to the task of capturing
reality
at all now as a fallibilist i regard
language and other modes of
representation that's necessarily
imperfect but this is to say that
whatever representation we do use
for example if one uses language to
describe or explain something
the extent to which this description or
explanation
can be improved and become more accurate
over time
has no limit we make objective progress
but a deconstructionist takes the
opposite view there's no possibility of
making
progress or of coming to represent or
model something
better and so they see their task as
taking apart
any attempt to do so it is destructive
not in order to improve in order to
simply make the trivial point
this is not the ultimate truth and
that's because there is no ultimate
truth or anything worth finding
so that's the point of deconstructionism
but let's read a passage from one of
derrida's more famous works
his book writing indifference and see if
we can make head or tales of it
so here's the quote quote
that philosophy died yesterday since
heigl or marx
nietzsche or heidegger and philosophy
should still wander towards the meaning
of
its death or that it has always lived
knowing itself to be dying
that philosophy died one day within
history
or that it has always fed on its own
agony on the violent way it opens
history
by opposing itself to non-philosophy
which is its past
and its concern its death and wellspring
that beyond the death or the dying
nature of philosophy
perhaps even because of it thought still
has a future
or even as it is said today is still
entirely to come
because of what philosophy has held in
store or more strangely still
that the future itself has a future all
these are unanswerable questions
by right of birth and for one time at
least
these problems put to philosophy as
problems philosophy cannot resolve
end quote so that's
derrida's writing and what is always so
offensive to me about the
post-modernists
and post-modern writing are the run-on
sentences the style is bad i mean
putting aside the substance where
strictly speaking if we were to analyze
this and i cannot be bothered getting
into an analytical
assessment of what's going on there i
don't want to evaluate the content here
because it's just full of contradictions
but they don't mind contradictions
they don't mind violating the law of the
excluded middle they don't mind
violating logic
what's really offensive as well to
anyone who
appreciates you know good literature and
good english and
clear writing it's just these run-on
sentences where
one clause or phrase is separated by a
comma by another clause or phrase
as if the writer is utterly allergic to
full stops
utterly allergic to sentences the
sentences are deliberately long
so as to be more opaque it's barely
coherent well
it's inter here and it's not barely
coherent it is incoherent
now one example read just reading one
example of post-modernism that's enough
that will suffice because all the big
names in post-modern philosophy write
exactly like that
there's no attempt to define a problem
let alone provide any semblance of a
useful solution
such as is done in genuine philosophy
analytical philosophy
it is as i've said before word soup
that's all it is
but the writers the postmodern writers
do not take this charge of incoherence
as a criticism
it's a feature for them it's not a bug
they say
there's no sense to make in the first
place and so they take that seriously by
making no sense
and all this would be laughable if it
wasn't for the fact that these
philosophies are taken seriously
and have sway and even if the texts
themselves are not being read by those
in power
their diluted forms or the central
tenets are
being taken seriously for example that
all perspectives are
equally valid but science has no
privileged position when it comes to
understanding the world
and if some politician or leader should
ask whether the expert
making such an astonishing claim like
for example some expert comes along and
says
all perspectives are equal and have
equal merit
if that politician or leader says well
do you have any research or evidence to
back up that kind of strange
pronouncement
well of course they have research and
evidence to point to they can point to
all of those journal articles
and these sort of texts and that in a
nutshell
is the problem with expertise
in this day and age expertise and
research and evidence in public
discourse
at times these days we need it we need
expertise we need research we need
evidence it's absolutely indispensable
but so few are sufficiently well
equipped to tell the difference between
what is good research and what is
fraudulent research
between what is the relevant actual
expertise on any given question and
the mere pretense at expertise in short
there's too little error correction
and too much reliance upon so-called
authority if a person is designated as
an academic at a university and they
hold a position where they have the
title of professor then this is seen by
many as all that it takes
and then these people go on to teach a
new generation of students and
and and advise those in power so
that's all very disheartening what is
the defense against this
well i'm going to come to that but first
okay so i'm changing venue yet again and
just before i begin
the reading we might just consider
what is the defense against
post-modernism or against cultural
relativism
and various other kinds of bad
philosophy before we talk more about
the origins of these things as far as i
can tell
the only defense the only bulwark
against it
is actual progress so physics actually
does get people to the moon back or to
the iss and back it does produce better
computers it's on the way to producing
quantum computers
medicine does find vaccines and cures
eventually
science produces internal combustion
engines they work the lights go on the
computers get faster
so science makes actual progress and
this is something that
the relativists the post-modernists
don't accomplish they don't make
progress they talk about it a lot
but no actual progress is made and so
because
science makes progress we know that the
explanations contain
some truth by which we mean they
represent reality with ever increasing
fidelity over time okay that ever
increasing fidelity that ever increasing
accuracy
with which scientific theories represent
objective reality
that can be called truth okay if we're
going to call truth anything
the truth content of something is just
that amount of that thing
which accurately captures objective
reality out there
some people reject that there's nothing
much to say to them okay if they reject
that
because the rest of us can see the truth
of the fact
that science works and meanwhile the the
alternative perspectives um the
relativist ideas which drive
social justice social justice is the new
kind of religion in the west
it has tenants it has practices it has
rituals
it doesn't like criticism if one is
designated as a heretic
one can have their careers threatened or
even their person threatened
the language used in social justice has
been designed and it's evolved over time
to survive
objections to it the language of
inclusion and diversity and equity
seems unobjectionable social justice
sounds altogether good
but any modifier to an actual virtue
like
justice it doesn't matter what word you
put in front of justice
you're modifying it so that you're
saying you're not interested in justice
but this other thing
this thing that is not justice and
that's what social justice is
and while enforcing inclusion or
diversity or
even equality enforcing any of these
things is a form of tyranny
people need to be free to be included or
not
to join groups without prejudice and to
strive to be better but
the inclusion diversity and equality of
social justice movements
do not permit this because they do not
mean inclusion diversity and equality
what they mean by inclusion is giving
authority to members of designated
groups
and by diversity they mean univer
uniformity of thought even if the
outward appearances appear to be
distinct so
so long as people look different that's
diversity but everyone has to think the
same
and by equality they mean equal in other
words everyone must be the same
including think the same and say the
same words
and so as we get into the chapter you're
going to see that
david's work and writing here it takes a
sort of broader
view of things there's an absolutely
crucial difference we must say
between david deutscher's critique of
aspects of philosophy and the critiques
that have come
in years gone by from elsewhere now it's
true
you can look at the work of let's say
someone else who i have great respect
for um
as a as a science popularizer neil
degrasse tyson
or the physicist brian cox both of those
are great or even richard dawkins
these thinkers are also critics of
philosophy
but it's a blanket critique of all of
so the difference here between david
deutsch and those other scientific
minded thinkers that there's rather a
lot of baby left
once the bathwater has been discarded in
david's critique
that is to say once he criticizes bad
philosophy
he gives you the good stuff and in fact
the beginning of infinity is the good
stuff
and this is so refreshing coming from a
physicist because they're a
rare breed there are not many physicists
who have
this level of respect for philosophy
and are able to find the kernels of
truth
amongst all the bad philosophy as well
as the merely false philosophy
now there are some other physicists
first in philosophy and in my experience
these include
david wallace paul davies
and although i disagree with him in many
ways sean carroll who understands
philosophy cannot be discarded
if you look up luke barnes he's an
australian cosmologist who understands
one must have a philosophy
to do science properly even if they're
unaware of it
and this is the nub of it for me
everyone's a philosopher and has a
philosophy
it's just that many of us are
unconscious of it
those who say they reject philosophy as
a useful discipline have a philosophy
their philosophy is to claim they reject
philosophy and everyone else should
and then act as if some other discipline
can guide their choices and the behavior
for instance in the religion versus
science dispute whether one chooses one
side or the other
or sees no conflict that's a philosophy
that they hold a kind of philosophy that
is a root
guiding that perspective a lecturer of
mine at the university of new south
wales michaelis michael he's still there
he used to say there was a difference
between having a philosophy
and doing philosophy what he meant was
something like that everyone has a
philosophy that part is unavoidable
but actually doing philosophy means
bringing that philosophy that you
necessarily have into
your consciousness and illuminating it
for yourself so that you know
what you actually think on any given
point and why
so the point of chapter 12 a physicist's
history of bad philosophy
the point as i see it and as david says
at the beginning of chapter
is to explain the broader reasons why
the multiverse
is not taken seriously as the
explanation of what is going on in
quantum mechanics but this is kind of
just the example
it's a prominent example to be sure
to highlight and use as kind of a lens
through which we view
the broader concept of bad philosophy
bad philosophy is this technical term
and david distinguishes between bad
philosophy and merely false philosophy
so i'll steal david's thunder and my
thunder from later on
by telling you simply now what the
distinction between
false philosophy and bad philosophy is
as david explains it
false philosophy is common and it's no
sin
false philosophy like false science or
false claims broadly are
often if they are honest attempts at
getting at the truth their attempts
i say honest there because there is an
honest attempt to be right and getting
things wrong
and therefore you make a false claim so
you were trying to get to the truth
but you failed and knowingly making a
false claim
lying that's dishonesty so there's the
difference between these two things
there's two kinds of
falsity in the world honestly trying to
get to the truth and failing
and producing something false and
dishonestly representing
what you thought was the truth okay so
there are two very different things
when it comes to false philosophy we
have all manner of historic
ideologies and dogmas from things like
empiricism
which is the false claim that all
knowledge can be derived from the senses
through to instrumentalism the false
claim that the purpose of science
is to predict the outcome of experiments
or in political theory the
false idea that kings have a divine
right or the philosophy of mathematics
the mathematical intuitionism is true
that whatever the mathematician
thinks certainly true must in fact be
certainly true
there are many false theories and they
are typically stepping stones to some
deeper truth
or better yet some better misconception
so falsity false knowledge
full science false philosophy these
things
are common and no sin everyone is trying
to produce knowledge and when they
honestly try to produce knowledge and
fail then they've produced something
false but it might be
it might be a solution to a whole bunch
of problems
that one has even if it's not a
universal solution in all cases
but bad philosophy bad philosophy is
different to this bad philosophy
unlike false philosophy in some way
prevents
criticism and in some way prevents new
knowledge from being created
and in this class of philosophy so we
have things like
relativism which asserts there's no
objective truth so there's no point
trying to figure out whether
alternatives to relativism
are true or false because relativism
just asserts that everything is a gray
mash if you like and there is no
right and wrong there's no black and
white on any particular issue
and that perhaps solid matter is made
out of atoms but perhaps it's made out
of something else and there is no
truth of the matter and investigating
won't do anything other than reveal
one's biases on the topic
because all we have are perspectives
and it destroys the notion to some
extent that debate discussion or
criticism have any real use because
we'll always have our
own individual perspectives and that's
all we have access to is our own
individual's perspectives
and we can't possibly agree because
there's nothing objective to say
when all there exists in the universe is
different people's subjectivity
i should also say here that um
philosophy itself is a discipline at
the university is unusual
and david makes this point elsewhere in
the beginning of infinity
because as an academic discipline it's
it consults the original texts and
this is bizarre it's not the case in
physics that you consult the original
texts
when you learn classical mechanics you
don't go to principia mathematica
the way in which newton originally
discovered or explained
the laws of motion the law of gravity
instead you go to textbooks
that might be the 10th generation of
textbook when you learn
special relativity or general relativity
you don't go to einstein's original
writings on the topic
because people today understand
relativity better than what einstein did
he was just the first
and so he had all sorts of
misconceptions and not to mention that
he wrote a lot of his stuff in german
anyway
so we consult textbooks today and
experts today when we try to learn
the best scientific theories but this is
not the case in philosophy
in philosophy the original texts are
studied in the same way that a
theologian will study the original text
the original sacred texts
or someone interested in the great works
of literature
will study the original texts but this
is this is
strange and misguided and wrong and it
shouldn't happen and the reason it's
strange misguided and wrong
and shouldn't happen is precisely
because
philosophy is about solving problems
it's far more akin
to science than it is to english
literature english literature
you want to cleave to the original text
because you're interested in the
language that shakespeare used
or some other great writer or poet used
if you're a theologian you're interested
in what was
actually said in those original texts
because you possibly believe that they
are divinely inspired and so you want to
know what words were being said by the
almighty
but in philosophy although we have great
thinkers
descartes leibniz spinozza poppa
what's not important so much is the
specific words that were being used as
the ideas that were trying to be
conveyed in the same way
that relativity uh evolution by natural
selection
the theory of how the periodic table
works
any number of theories in science
we don't care what the original
discoverer
of those theories actually said unless
of course you're interested in the
history of science
then you might be interested in the
specific words that they used but we're
interested in the
content of the theory and the content of
the theory
does not include the particular choice
of vocabulary
that that particular scientist had at
that particular time
now there's also some one other thing
we'll just mention this before moving on
in terms of studying philosophy at
university
the philosophers in their original texts
are often
studied out of context to some extent
there is a context in which the
philosophers were often working
leibniz for example wrote about free
will but why
well he was writing the context of his
contemporary and
some might say his rival isaac newton
and isaac newton's
the division of reality that one gets
from reading isaac newton
although newton didn't necessarily think
this himself was
that of a clockwork universe where
particles in the void
moved under perfectly deterministic laws
where
given any possible state of the universe
at one time there was only one possible
outcome
at any future time and so that seemed to
rule out
free will and so leibniz wrote about
free will in that context and it's
important to know about the context
and so often this context is subtracted
out
papa was all about when talking about
the
ancient philosophers or even the um
pre-modern philosophers
was always at great pains to talk about
the problem situation in which they
found themselves
that looking at philosophical theories
in the mere abstract
was nowhere near as helpful as looking
at the particular kind of problem that
the philosophers were focused on at the
time
so this is an unusual episode because i
had so much to say
in introduction to this chapter
and there was so much contemporary
material
that i felt was relevant
to really showing how important
this particular chapter is at this time
in history
it's been important for many years ever
since the beginning of infinity was
published but it's only become more
important this chapter 12.
we're going to get into the reading now
we're going to make that an entirely
different episode and so i've split this
up into
two episodes after all this one i guess
was setting the stage but if you'd like
to go to the next episode that's where
the reading is
[Music]
you